# Dissertation Project
During my time as a bioinformatics student I did a final year project that took my knowledge of genetics, statistics, and computer science
to the test. This project was finding the pathways and mechanisms responsible for the regulation of transposable element expression.

# What are Transposable Elements and why are they important
Transposable elements (TEs) are mobile DNA sequences that can integrate from one part of the genome to another altering the germline of an organism. TEs take up almost half the genome in many species such as mice and humans which makes understanding how transposable elements are regulated important to understanding what mechanisms can trigger their expression. These transposable elements include LINEs, SINEs, and ERVs. Pathways such as methylation, pluripotency, and piRNAs are shown to repress the expression of transposable elements so understanding the pathways and mechanisms that regulate the expression of these pathways will be useful in understanding how TEs are repressed. 

# Aims and Methodology
The aim of this analysis is to identify the pathways and mechanisms responsible for regulating the expression of transposable elements in the mammalian germline. Performing RNASeq is a logical approach as it captures all expressed genes and not just a particular gene of interest. Data was analysed from two different strains of mice (129S4 strain and the C57BL/6N strain) at embryonic day 15.5 where the sample either contains a DazlKO or they were a control sample. DazlKO mice allow for how transposable elements are expressed with pathways associated with regulating transposable elements. Expression at embryonic day 9.5, 11.5, and 13.5 was also examined to see how the expression of genes changes before embryonic day 15.5. RNASeq analysis of raw sequence data used a customised pipeline containing a quality control, alignment, and differential expression analysis of the reads. The results showed that there was no evidence of remethylation as there was an absence of Dnmt3l expression which is confirmed in previous studies. There was also limited expression of piRNA biogenesis factors in the DazlKO samples suggesting piRNAs were unlikely to be made implying an increased expression of TEs. However, there was no upregulated expression of LINE1 elements or SINES in the DazlKO samples suggesting other alternative pathways were involved in controlling TE expression. However, there was upregulated expression in some of the ERVs, which was shown in previous studies to be linked with increased expression of pluripotency factors. In conclusion, the pathways and mechanisms known for regulating the expression of transposable elements are not expressed, yet this does not produce an increase in TE expression, suggesting that there may be another pathways or mechanisms involved in controlling transposable element expression.
